HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Democrats sparred
in the troubled town of Flint,
Michigan, while
Ted Cruz plays catchup, winning
the same amount
of states as front-runner Donald
Trump over
the weekend.
Also ahead, we remember Nancy
Reagan. Judy
Woodruff sat down with the
former first lady
in one of her last interviews.
NANCY REAGAN, Former First Lady:
I think I
was a little bit more realistic
about people
than -- than he was. And that
was my contribution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how
security agencies
are screening the thousands of
refugees pouring
into Europe after the Paris
attacks.
BERNDT KORNER, Frontex: We are
just trying
to investigate whoever is
apprehended, whoever
is brought to the offices, check
them through
the databases, perform the
necessary security
checks in order to prevent that
anything slips
through.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
presidential hopefuls
are pointing to a new round of
voting tomorrow,
with the leaders hoping to pad
their leads,
and rivals hoping to close the
gap.
With that in mind, all of the
candidates were
on the road today.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Who is going to win North
Carolina?
AUDIENCE: Trump!
DONALD TRUMP: Right?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Donald Trump
spent his day
down South, where he's won eight
states and
the bulk of his 384 delegates so
far.
DONALD TRUMP: Uh-oh. We have
another one.
Get him out of here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Along with big
crowds, the
Republican front-runner again
faced protesters.
DONALD TRUMP: Go home to mommy.
Tell her to
tuck you in bed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And he still
has to contend
with Ted Cruz as well. The Texas
senator is
now within 100 delegates of
Trump, after scoring
weekend wins in Kansas and in
Maine.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
In this race, it is clear. A
vote for any
other candidate, a vote for
Marco Rubio or
a vote for John Kasich is a vote
for Donald
Trump, because there is only one
who has repeatedly
beaten Donald Trump.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Marco Rubio
managed to win
Puerto Rico yesterday, but his
real hopes
now rest on his home state of
Florida next
week.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
We knew this would be the
roughest period
in the campaign, given the
makeup of the electoral
map.
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER (R),
Former Governor
of California: Welcome my very
good friend
Governor John Kasich!
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ditto John
Kasich, the Ohio
governor who hopes to fare
better in neighboring
Michigan, one of four states
holding Republican
contests tomorrow.
Meanwhile, Democrats Hillary
Clinton and Bernie
Sanders held their testiest
debate yet last
night. They faced off in Flint,
Michigan,
the town where lead poisoned the
drinking
water, and both of them laid
into Republican
Governor Rick Snyder.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
He should resign.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I agree. The governor should
resign or be
recalled.
HARI SREENIVASAN: After that,
the pair agreed
on little else. Sanders hit
Clinton on trade.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Secretary
Clinton supported
virtually every one of these
disastrous trade
agreements written by corporate
America.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In turn,
Clinton played
up her support for President
Obama's auto
rescue plan.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
will tell
you something else that Senator
Sanders was
against. He was against the auto
bailout.
I voted to save the auto
industry.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: He voted
against the
money that ended up saving the
auto industry.
I think that is a pretty big
difference.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Whoa. Well,
I -- if you
are talking about the Wall
Street bailout,
where some of your friends
destroyed this
economy...
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: You
know...
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: ... through
-- excuse
me, I'm talking.
ANDERSON COOPER, CNN Anchor: Let
him respond.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: If
you're going to
talk, tell the whole story,
Senator Sanders.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Let me tell
my story.
You tell yours.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I will.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The two also
sparred on
gun control and Wall Street.
Today, Sanders
charged Clinton misstated his
position on
the auto bailout.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: I voted for
that bailout
and support of the workers in
the automobile
industry.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clinton also
stayed in Michigan,
appearing to strike a
conciliatory stance
in Grand Rapids.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I would
hope to be
able to enlist Bernie in helping
me to reach
out to his supporters if I am so
fortunate
enough to be the nominee.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Clinton won
one state to
Sanders' three over the weekend,
but she's
still well ahead in delegates,
with 1,130,
nearly half of what's needed.
Democrats hold
contests tomorrow in Michigan
and Mississippi.
And late today, former New York
City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg said he will
not run for
president after all. He told The
New York
Times that he fears a three-way
race would
guarantee Donald Trump's
election.
In the day's other news,
tributes poured in
today for former first lady
Nancy Reagan,
after her death Sunday in Los
Angeles. President
Obama ordered flags flown at
half-staff, and,
at a meeting, he took a moment
to offer praise.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
As somebody who has been lucky
enough to have
an extraordinary partner in my
life as well,
I know how much she meant, not
just to President
Reagan, but to the country as a
whole. He
was lucky to have her. And I'm
sure he'd be
the first to acknowledge that.
So, she will
be missed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mrs. Reagan
will lie in
repose on Wednesday at the
Reagan Presidential
Library in Simi Valley,
California. The funeral
will be Friday. We will have
more on Nancy
Reagan, in her own words, later
in the program.
The news of Mrs. Reagan's death
came as former
President Jimmy Carter announced
he no longer
needs treatment for cancer. He
said his latest
MRI showed no signs of melanoma
that had spread
to his brain at one point. The
former president
is 91. He's been on a newly
approved drug
that helps the body target
cancer cells.
The Pentagon now says a U.S.
drone strike
killed more than 150 Islamist
militants in
Somalia. Saturday's attack hit a
training
camp for Al-Shabaab fighters,
about 120 miles
north of Mogadishu. A U.S.
military spokesman
says they were getting ready to
launch a large-scale
operation.
Heavy fighting broke out today
along Tunisia's
frontier with Libya, when dozens
of gunmen
stormed a border town.
Authorities reported
53 dead in Ben Gardane near
beach towns popular
with tourists. Battles raged
into the night
before the army regained
control. Tunisia's
president said it was the work
of Islamic
State extremists out of Libya.
BEJI CAID ESSEBSI, President of
Tunisia (through
translator): This is an
unprecedented attack,
planned and organized, and whose
goal was
probably to take control of this
area and
to announce a new emirate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Extremist
attacks in Tunisia
killed dozens of tourists last
year.
And, in Pakistan, a suicide
bomber killed
11 people and wounded 15 in the
northwest
town of Shabqadar. The bomber
blew himself
up after guards stopped him from
entering
a court. A Pakistani Taliban
group said it
was revenge for the execution of
a man who
killed a provincial governor.
European leaders convened in
Brussels today,
searching for a way to shut off
the flow of
migrants. As they did, hundreds
more kept
arriving in Greece, but they're
now blocked
from advancing any farther.
James Mates of independent news
reports from
Brussels
JAMES MATES: They came to Europe
in search
of safety and a better life.
What they found
is a tent city on a bleak
hillside, with hostility
and razor-wire fences now
springing up across
a continent that they believed
was the promised
land.
And as they shiver on Greece's
northern border,
the continent's leaders are
meeting 1,500
miles away, in turn threatening
and haggling
over how to stop anymore from
coming.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): I just want to
respond to how
we can reduce migrants for not
only a few
countries, but for all
countries, including
Greece. It can't just be about
closing something.
We need to find a sustainable
solution together
with Turkey, as well as putting
an end to
illegal immigration and
improving the living
conditions of the refugees.
JAMES MATES: It is this man who
appears to
now hold the keys to Europe, the
prime minister
of Turkey, who can stop migrants
coming or
can agree to take them back, but
at a price,
six billion euros and a promise
his country
can soon join the E.U.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister: And
Turkey is ready to work with the
E.U. Turkey
is ready to be a member of the
E.U. as well.
And, today, I hope this summit,
which we will
not focus on the irregular
migration, but
also Turkey's accession process
to E.U.
JAMES MATES: But these were the
scenes just
this weekend in Istanbul after
an opposition
newspaper was shut down by an
increasingly
authoritarian government.
Without the bargaining
chip of refugees, Turkey would
be nowhere
near E.U. membership.
But here they are today seated
around the
E.U.'s top table, the Turkish
flag on the
wall, an ever-growing list of
demands being
presented, knowing that, for as
long as the
refugees keep coming, they hold
the whip hand.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Late today,
Hungary said
it will veto any plan to
resettle asylum-seekers
directly from Turkey.
Back in this country, the
average bonus on
Wall Street fell 9 percent last
year, to just
over $146,000. The New York
Comptroller's
Office says it's because profits
in the securities
industry were down sharply, and
bonuses are
tied to those profits. Overall
compensation
for Wall Street workers,
including salary,
actually rose 14 percent. It's
now nearly
$405,000, a record.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 67 points to
close at 17074.
The Nasdaq fell eight points,
and the S&P
500 added a little less than two
points.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
our Politics
Monday duo on the increasingly
controversial
race for the White House;
remembrances of
a first lady, the legacy of the
late Nancy
Reagan; European leaders seeking
a new solution
to the migrant crisis; and much
more.
Reagan; European leaders seeking
a new solution
to the migrant crisis; and much
more.
From a tough Democratic debate
in Flint, and
strong showing by Ted Cruz in
weekend voting,
it's a perfect time for Politics
Monday, with
Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report.
So, I happened to do a little
program on the
weekend. There was some
politics. There was
some news.
Let's start with the debate last
night. This
was probably the first time I
have really
seen Bernie Sanders and Hillary
Clinton go
at each other as directly.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes,
it was an intense debate. They
came armed
and ready.
Bernie Sanders is -- he has a
lot at stake.
There is a primary in Michigan
on Tuesday,
and if he can't win and win big,
he's going
to have a tough time. And so he
came ready
to hit Hillary Clinton hard on
trade. He believes
that that's a really strong area
for him,
because she supported trade
deals when her
husband was president. And those
trade deals,
he says, led to the loss of
jobs.
Well, she was ready, too, and
she came ready
to hit him on the auto bailout.
She had sort
of a narrow argument, but
basically said he
voted against the bailout bills
that included
a bailout for the auto industry.
Bernie Sanders
takes issue with it. But it led
to some fireworks,
and it led to Sanders -- during
the debate,
Clinton interrupted him, and he
said, wait,
no, I have got to finish.
And that happened a couple of
times, and Twitter
blew up over it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Also, Amy, besides trying to
score points
on social media and correct each
other on
what actually happened on social
media, they're
trying to court blue-collar
workers in places
in the Rust Belt. They're also
trying to go
after African-American votes.
Are they effective
about this?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
it's funny.
Compared to the Republican
debates, which
you have no idea what's going to
happen any
time you tune in, the Democratic
debates have
become somewhat predictable. We
know which
lines each candidate is going to
use. Hillary
Clinton is going to go after
Bernie Sanders
on guns. Yes, it was a little
different that
she went after him on the auto
bailout.
Bernie Sanders is going to talk
about Wall
Street and attack her from the
left on those
issues. And the results in state
after state
are somewhat predictable, too,
Bernie Sanders
doing well among white voters,
doing well
among independent voters, not as
well as among
African-Americans, not as well
as among Democrats.
And we're seeing that. The
latest poll out
of Michigan shows the same lines
being drawn.
So, I would be very surprised if
Bernie Sanders
was able to do well in Michigan,
and if he
does lose, it will be for the
same reasons
that he's been unsuccessful in
states going
-- well, pretty much every
state, except for
New Hampshire.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about this notion that Ted Cruz
has made a
surge over this last weekend.
He picked up two states. Donald
Trump had
two states. Not all states are
created equal.
Not all voting processes are the
same, right?
But is this the Republican
establishment pushing
back against Donald Trump in any
sort of concerted
manner? And there is also some
question on,
is Ted Cruz the counterweight
for those Republicans
who are on the sideline right
now?
TAMARA KEITH: You would be
hard-pressed to
say that the Republican
establishment is rooting
for Ted Cruz. Ted Cruz is not a
friend of
the Republican establishment.
But what does appear to have
maybe happened,
and we will know more after more
voting has
happened, is that Donald Trump's
momentum,
Donald Trump's, like, there is
no way anybody
is ever going to be able to stop
him kind
of momentum has possibly slowed.
But, really, we need some more
data points,
and especially with Donald
Trump, the landscape
is littered with people who have
made predictions
about Donald Trump slowing down.
AMY WALTER: Including some
people sitting
here.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: So, I will take
that.
We have had a lot of the
theories about this
race. We have had a lot of the
theories. There
was the Marco Rubio theory, that
he was the
one who are going to be able to
stop Donald
Trump, and he had a terrible
weekend.
Actually, it started as the Ted
Cruz theory
from -- in the beginning because
of the way
the calendar was situated. Those
Southern
states were supposed to help Ted
Cruz. South
Carolina was going to be his
launching pad.
That didn't work. We have had a
lot of theories.
They haven't really come true.
Michigan is
going to be important, not just
for Bernie
Sanders and Hillary Clinton, but
also to see
if somebody can stop Trump in a
state like
that.
The warning, though, is, the
establishment
candidate in 2012, Mitt Romney,
barely won
Michigan. Rick Santorum came up
very close,
Rick Santorum running as a
populist that year.
So I think we're going to see a
very being
challenge going forward.
Look, Donald Trump has momentum
right now.
He doesn't have all the
delegates that he
needs, but the stronger he
looks, the harder
it is to beat him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is also
this tension
that is playing out of the
parties vs. the
people. And it's on both sides
and it's kind
of inverted. Right?
On the Democratic side, you see
supporters
of Bernie Sanders saying, what's
all this
business with superdelegates? We
have this
popular candidate and really he
should be
the one that is in the lead
right now, not
Hillary. On the other side, you
have got talk
of the possibility of the
Republican Party
maybe adjusting the rules a bit
that could
increase the chances for a rival
of Donald
Trump. Right?
So there is this idea from both
sides that
maybe the parties don't
represent us in the
process.
TAMARA KEITH: And let's just say
that if the
Republican Party were to step in
and somehow
magically make an establishment
candidate
come out, or if superdelegates
decided the
race on the Democratic side,
people would
go nuts.
This election is all about the
anti-establishment.
It's all about telling party
elites that they
haven't been listening. And so
it wouldn't
be pretty for either party if
that happened.
On the superdelegates with
Bernie Sanders,
we have to note that he is also
trailing in
pledged delegates. The
superdelegates, he's
way behind, but if you throw out
the superdelegates
and just look at the pledged
delegates, he's
down by almost 200 delegates.
Delegates are awarded
proportionally on the
Democrat side, which means you
get roughly
a percentage based on the
percentage you get
in the polls. And as a result of
that, it
will be very hard for him to
make that up.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
No, he's done very well in
caucus states and
in states that are more
homogeneous. Again,
breaking out of that mold is
going to be very
important for him, and thus far
we haven't
seen it.
On the Republican side, this is
frustrating
to many in the Republican Party,
the idea
that Donald Trump could be their
nominee.
But to thwart the process by
changing rules
and trying to come at the last
minute during
the convention with literally a
change in
the rules that says you don't
need to get
X-number of states in order to
get the nomination,
I think, would cause way too
much havoc.
Look, there is enough stress
right now among
Republicans that if they do
disassociate or
distance themselves from Trump,
that his supporters,
his voters are going to go away,
they are
going to lose that energy and
enthusiasm.
Balancing those things, people
who dislike
Trump immensely with the ones
who are turning
out in rallies for him has been
something
that the Republicans have
struggled with,
they will continue to struggle
witness.
As I have said before, I think
this is a tipping
point for the Republican Party,
who they're
going to be, what their
standard-bearer is
going to look like, who is going
to line up
behind Donald Trump, who is
going to be opposed
to him. It is going to be messy
for a very
long time, and I don't think
that the nomination
fight is going to make it any
easier.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Amy
Walter of
The Cook Political Report,
Tamara Keith of
NPR, thanks so much.
AMY WALTER: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now we
remember a first
lady who kept a high profile and
was an influential
force.
Nancy Reagan long said her sole
mission was
to back her Ronnie, and
strengthen his presidency.
In one of her last interviews,
she spoke to
Judy Woodruff for a 2011 PBS
documentary.
She discussed her role balancing
out her husband.
NANCY REAGAN, Former First Lady:
I think I
was a little bit more realistic
about people
than -- than he was. And that
was my contribution.
It was just being aware of
people and what
they were doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think that
you were
more intuitive, that you could
read people
better than your husband could?
NANCY REAGAN: Sometimes, yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just three
months into the
presidency, the assassination
attempt on President
Reagan shook the fiercely
protective first
lady.
NANCY REAGAN: My Secret Service
guy said,
"There's been a shooting, but
don't worry.
The president is all right."
Well, I'm starting for the
elevator and they
said, "But he's all right. He
hasn't been
hit."
And I say to them, "You either
find me or
a car, or I will walk."
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you said, they
didn't know
at first he had been hit. And
even when they
knew he had been hit, they
couldn't find the
bullet. Isn't that right?
NANCY REAGAN: Yes, they -- no,
they couldn't.
The bullet had lodged so close
to his heart,
it was just a miracle that it
didn't go into
his heart.
I remember one nurse came to me
and said,
"We may just have to leave it in
there." Well,
that didn't sound like a very
good idea to
me. But they finally got it, but
the whole
thing was a miracle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have
commented a number
of times that that had a huge
effect on you
and it changed you in some ways.
NANCY REAGAN: Oh, yes, of course
it did. Every
time he went out the door, I
don't think I
took a deep breath until he got
back.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Nancy Reagan
also served
as a political partner. She
influenced and
supported her husband's policy
towards the
Soviet Union, including some of
his most famous
words.
NANCY REAGAN: When he gave the
speech, "Tear
down this wall," there were
many, many people
in the administration who didn't
think that
he should say that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It must have been
impossible
for you to just kind of sit back
and watch
all that happen.
NANCY REAGAN: Well, I didn't
just sit back.
You know, I was talking to
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because you felt
that this
was something that was going to
be part of
your husband's legacy as
president.
NANCY REAGAN: Well, he believed
in it strongly,
as did I.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Years later,
President Reagan
developed Alzheimer's, and the
first lady
became his primary caregiver,
until his death
in 2004.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you feel you
had the chance
to say goodbye to him?
NANCY REAGAN: Yes. As a matter
of fact, he
gave me a wonderful gift at that
time. He
was in bed.
And, suddenly, he turned his
hand and opened
his eyes and looked at me. And
then he closed
his eyes and went. And that was
a wonderful
gift.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We take a
closer look at
the remarkable life of Nancy
Reagan with James
Rosebush, who served in a
variety of roles
at the Reagan White House,
including chief
of staff to the first lady, and
presidential
historian and "NewsHour" regular
Michael Beschloss.
James, I want to start with you.
You saw the first lady in a way
that most
of us could never imagine.
That's really starting
at 7:00 a.m. And you have said
before that
she's done more work before 7:00
in the morning
than you expected anyone to.
®MD-BO /JAMES ROSEBUSH, Former
Nancy Reagan
Chief of Staff: That's right.
By the time I got to the office
and went to
the senior staff meeting, she'd
read all the
morning papers, she had seen all
the morning
shows, she had the advanced
copies of the
newsweeklies, and she knew
exactly what she
thought.
So she was a highly intelligent
woman. I think
that was lost on a lot of
people. They didn't
recognize that. And she was
engaged not only
in her own program and schedule,
but very
observant of what the president
was doing.
And she was a person who,
therefore, was easy
to work for, because she knew
what she wanted
and she communicated it well.
And it was obviously an
extraordinary honor
to work for her, to work for
both of them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael, what
he's describing
is almost what you would expect
from a chief
of staff, not necessarily just a
first lady.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Historian:
That's what I have always
thought.
You might have, for instance,
Hillary Clinton,
who at the beginning of her
husband's administration
was given this health care
project, but Nancy
Reagan without any title other
than first
lady really was sort of an
alternative chief
of staff, because she roamed the
whole lot
and also particularly kept an
guy on who in
the entourage was helping her
husband and
who wasn't.
And it worked well in the first
term, when
Jim Baker was chief of staff. He
saw that
as an asset to be able to tap
her skills and
expertise and, you know, what
she could tell
him about what the president
wanted and didn't
want. Didn't work so well second
term, when
there was a chief of staff named
Don Regan,
who had a very exalted idea of
his own place
in the universe, finally hung up
on the first
lady after they had words.
He did not last for long.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
James, how -- paint us a
picture, if you can,
of what sort of power or
influence she held.
And she made sure that she
stayed out of policy
decisions, but when it came to
personnel,
ultimately, she, I guess, is the
last word
that influences the president's
ear.
JAMES ROSEBUSH: I also want to
quickly add,
though, that she was acutely
aware of the
fact that she wasn't elected,
she wasn't an
employee of the federal
government, and she
didn't enjoy the recognition of
an official
position in the federal
government.
So there were times, for
example, when I was
lobbied to have Nancy Reagan
come up to Capitol
Hill and to testify on issues
related to her
programs, in particular trying
to arrest the
advance of youthful drug abuse
and the ravages
that that causes in individual
lives.
And they were genuine requests:
Come up and
tell us about what you're doing,
what we should
be doing on Capitol Hill. I was
all for that.
She was completely against it,
which shows
you what I knew. She didn't want
to appear
in any way to be influencing
policy or government
spending in any way.
So, in terms of her impact on
what her husband's
policies were, I would say she
was observant,
but she wasn't a participant,
she wasn't a
direct participant.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: And always
when she was
first lady and afterwards wanted
this idea
of her as sort of the eminence
grise, she
didn't want people to think
that.
I knew her a tiny bit in later
years. And
I once talked to her about that.
And she said:
"It was all Ronnie. Don't pay
attention to
me. I really didn't have a large
role in that
administration."
I knew at the time that that
wasn't quite
true. I think, as time goes on,
we will find
that her role was very large.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you think
about, Michael,
in historical contact, the
previous two or
three first ladies before her
and what kind
of a departure that was, maybe
even the tone
that it set for the country, it
was different.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: It was,
although Rosalynn
Carter had attended Cabinet
meetings, got
a lot of flak for that. Nancy
Reagan wouldn't
have dreamt of doing that.
But when you think about it,
Hari, in the
1980s, Nancy Reagan was
criticized in many
circles for being overly adoring
and uncritical
of her husband and also for
acting as his
political partner, especially on
key occasions.
Nowadays, I think things have
changed enough
that we would celebrate her for
doing most
those things. And it is amazing
to look back
and think that those were two of
the things
she caught the most flak for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James, when
you worked with
her, what did you think her
legacy was going
to be, vs. now, decades later,
knowing what
she's accomplished?
JAMES ROSEBUSH: Yes, it's
interesting.
The whole concept of legacy is
interesting,
and I will comment on that. But
to pick up
on something Michael brought up,
I think that
one thing that's lost on the
public is that
people go through these extreme
situations,
these high -- I would say
high-wattage leadership
positions, particularly in
American politics.
They evolve over time. They
change. They develop.
Hopefully, they deepen as a
result of the
experiences they go through. And
Nancy Reagan
wasn't immune to that. I saw her
grow as a
person. I saw her develop
additional skills.
And I remember among the things
that she did
as a first among first ladies
was to speak
at the General Assembly of the
United Nations
on the issue drugs. And I
remember, when she
went to New York to do that
talk, she was
asked about this very issue.
What was she
really doing? Was she having an
impact on
policy?
And she said, "Well, do you
expect me to sit
at home sorting out my husband's
sock drawer?"
(LAUGHTER)
JAMES ROSEBUSH: And that drew a
lot of laughter.
But she grew in her role. I
think she grew
in her confidence. She grew in
understanding
the issues, and naturally. She
was well-educated
and she was a very bright
person. And she
didn't -- I think at that point
she probably
came into her own with a higher
degree of
confidence that, yes, she did
have something
to say.
So, I think she has a dual
legacy and I think
it's interesting. She has -- and
she gets
a lot of credit for and
sympathy, particularly
in the later years, of taking
care of her
husband, and which she did
throughout their
marriage, but in an official
capacity, and
then during the 10 years of his
disability.
But I would like to think that
she will also
get credit for being an
intelligent, independent
woman, leader who was devoted to
her country
and worked hard to promote the
American ideal
as best she could on her own as
well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael, a
legacy for her?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: I think she
made it possible
for Ronald Reagan to become
president and
to become a major president.
He had many qualities. One of
them wasn't
an ability to see through people
who might
do him harm or not serve him
well. Nancy Reagan
did that so well. And the other
thing is that
she wasn't ideological.
Maybe the biggest thing she did
during that
presidency was, in the middle
1980s, she went
to her husband and said, too
many people think
you're being too energetic in
pursuing the
Cold War. Show them that you're
a peacemaker.
And he began with symbolism,
finally wound
up working with Gorbachev to do
a lot to end
the Cold War. That began with
her. Her big
goal was always, how can I help
my husband,
not, how can I pursue an
ideological agenda?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael Beschloss,
James Rosebush, thanks so much.
JAMES ROSEBUSH: Pleasure, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
true story
of a modern-day Romeo and Juliet
set in rural
Afghanistan.
But, first, as we reported
earlier, European
leaders met today on the refugee
crisis. One
major ongoing issue, how to
screen such a
huge volume of people for a
small number of
possible terrorists.
As special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant tells
us now, it's not an easy job.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Here is a
genuinely innocent
and uplifting scene from
Europe's refugees
crisis.
(SINGING)
MALCOLM BRABANT: Jerome Kaluta
from Congo
is providing a few moments' joy
for Afghan
children stranded in Greece
after Macedonia
sealed the migrant trail at the
border.
But what worries Europe's
military, intelligence
and police agencies are the
large numbers
of fit young men entering the
E.U. Many threw
away their documents on the
instructions of
smugglers and so the authorities
often have
no idea who they really are.
NATO's supreme commander in
Europe, U.S. Air
Force General Philip Breedlove,
left the Senate
Armed Services Committee in no
doubt about
his fears in testimony last
week.
GEN. PHILIP BREEDLOVE, NATO
Supreme Allied
Commander: Europe faces mass
migration spurred
by state instability and state
collapse and
masking the movements of
criminals, terrorists
and foreign fighters. Within
this mix, ISIL,
or Da'esh, is spreading like a
cancer, taking
advantage of paths of least
resistance, threatening
European nations and our own
with terrorist
attacks.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is Athens'
Victoria
Square, where hundreds of
refugees congregate
every day, as they realized
their preferred
destinations in Northern Europe
are no longer
attainable.
Human rights activists worry
that Europe's
humanitarian response is being
endangered
by what they regard as
scare-mongering.
George Kosmopoulos of Amnesty
International
is disturbed that the refugee
crisis and the
perceived terrorist threat are
being conflated.
GEORGE KOSMOPOULOS, Director,
Amnesty International
Greece: The way we see it, these
people are
genuine refugees. And what
they're fleeing
for is actually terror and very,
very great
human rights violations. They're
leaving behind
war. They're leaving behind
destruction. And
this is the lens we should
apply, and not
put the blame to a whole group
of people who
are simply looking for safety
and a better
future in Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: General
Breedlove's comments
are at odds with the analysis of
senior E.U.
officials. They believe that
he's exaggerated.
But, recently, Rob Wainwright,
who is the
director of Europol, the
European politics
agency, said that he believed
that there were
as many as 5,000 I.S.-trained
jihadis wandering
free in Europe with the
intention of causing
mass casualties amongst the
civilian population.
Mr. Wainwright added, however,
that he didn't
think that there was any
concrete evidence
to suggest that terrorists were
using the
migration flow as cover to
infiltrate Europe.
But Mary Bossi, one of Greece's
leading terrorism
experts, believes that European
officials
are downplaying the potential
threat from
I.S.
MARY BOSSI, Terrorism Expert: It
comes to
the number of 30,000 foreign
fighters into
the ISIS. These foreign fighters
come from
Europe and Russia. They come
from Western
countries and Russia and all
over the place.
So, a number of fighters who are
entering,
only to travel up and forth from
tension areas
to the Western countries is much
greater than
the number that are given to us.
I think they are giving us a
smaller number
in order to keep the threat
level lower.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Patrolling
Greece's long
and porous maritime with Turkey
are a flotilla
of fast-response vessels from
various E.U.
countries.
They're attached to the border
agency Frontex.
It's reinforcing Greece, whose
financial crisis
has hobbled its ability to
protect Europe's
eastern flank. Frontex boats are
rescuing
migrants in the thousands.
Information obtained
on the front line is fed back to
the Frontex
situation room in the Polish
capital, Warsaw.
Communications chief Izabella
Cooper:
IZABELLA COOPER, Frontex: The
green dots here
that we are seeing are --
represent boats
with migrants and refugees
coming from Turkey
towards Greece since the
beginning of this
year. And the white ones that we
see here
on different islands, we can see
three of
them, are ongoing search and
rescue.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Critics accuse
the agency
of being little more than a taxi
service.
But Berndt Korner, Frontex's
deputy director,
insists that the new improved
screening of
migrants is providing crucial
information
for Europol, the agency
responsible for dealing
with terrorism.
BERNDT KORNER, Frontex: ISIS, as
you mentioned
it, is one of the core issues
that we are
devoting our attention to, but
this is only
one part. We are just trying to
investigate
whoever is apprehended, whoever
is brought
to the offices, check them
through the databases,
perform the necessary security
checks, in
order to prevent that anything
slips through.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But do you
think General
Breedlove is correct when he
says that it
is spreading like a cancer?
BERNDT KORNER: We have made
detections. Those
detections have been forwarded
to the national
authorities for proper
decision-taking. We
have strengthened our
capabilities in anti-terrorism
measures.
So, for the time being, whatever
we could
detect was done. The sharing of
intelligence
and so the cooperation has been
greatly enhanced.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This used to be
Athens' main
airport. Now disused and almost
derelict,
it is providing the most basic
shelter for
migrants thwarted by the new
travel restrictions.
Greek states and agencies are
nowhere to be
seen, residents relying on the
kindness of
ordinary citizens.
Among those stuck here is Edriss
Bayat, who
shows his certificate of
employment as an
administrator for NATO in
Afghanistan. We
met Bayat three weeks ago in
Lesbos after
he was brought ashore by Greek
coast guards.
He was turned back by the
Macedonian authorities,
despite being a Taliban target,
because of
his relationship with NATO,
underscored by
this photograph with General
David Petraeus.
EDRISS BAYAT, Refugee: More than
90 percent
or 80 percent of the people,
they are traveling
with a small child, with wives
and mothers
and families. So, a terrorist is
not going
to travel with their family or a
small child.
If it's terrorists, they should
come alone.
And I don't know how it's
possible for a terrorist
to come and stay in the
compounds.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Back at
Victoria Square,
musician Jerome Kaluta has a
message for Europe,
as it prepares to shatter the
refugees' hopes.
JEROME KALUTA, Musician: I think
it's in our
best interest to be together, to
live with
everyone and anybody, because we
are all human
beings, and we all have rights.
We all are
God's children.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Although that
sentiment is
enshrined in European treaties,
the reality
is that the E.U. is delivering
the following
edict: Stay away.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Athens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Cody,
Nebraska, has a population
of 156 people, normally not
enough to sustain
a grocery store. But thanks to a
unique educational
opportunity, residents of the
town don't have
to drive 30 minutes to the next
town to buy
food.
Mike Tobias from our PBS
partners at NET News
and Harvest Public Media has the
story.
MIKE TOBIAS: Sitting atop a
sparsely populated
county the size of Connecticut,
Cody is not
a prime location for any retail
business.
So how's the Circle C Market
been able to
survive and thrive here for
almost three years?
Because it's mostly run by the
students of
Cody-Kilgore School.
TODD CHESSMORE, Cody-Kilgore
Unified Schools:
We have adults that are
involved, but, essentially,
we try and get the kids to do
pretty much
everything, yes.
MAN: Tell me what you're doing.
STUDENT: I'm just ordering for
next week.
STUDENT: I'm entering all the
daily work in
QuickBooks.
STUDENT: I'm doing the produce
order. I'm
the produce coordinator.
MIKE TOBIAS: Here's how it
works. A community
board oversees the nonprofit
operation. During
the school day, students take on
tasks here,
as part of different classes,
with a paid
adult employee on hand to help
train and supervise.
The rest of the time, students
are paid to
work at Circle C. Almost all of
Cody-Kilgore's
165 K-12 students are involved,
from elementary
school students creating
decorations, to high
schoolers deciding to stock a
new cereal.
STUDENT: A Cocoa Krisp rice bag,
so we could
do that one.
MIKE TOBIAS: The store does
enough business
to run in the black, but not by
much, Chessmore
says, and primarily because of
how it's run.
TODD CHESSMORE: Without the
school being this
as intimately involved as it is,
I don't think
it could be done. It cannot
generate enough
funds and still be competitive
to stay open.
MIKE TOBIAS: What doesn't show
up on the Circle
C ledger is how the village and
its people
benefit from not having a
one-hour round-trip
to get to the next closest
grocery store,
but also how students benefit
from having
a place to market products they
have created,
a place to earn a little money,
and maybe
most importantly, a place to
gain real-world
experience.
LIZZY HOOPER, Student: If I ever
want to run
a business, I know what to put
on the shelves,
how to put it on the shelves,
how to finance,
how to get grants, marketing and
advertising.
MIKE TOBIAS: An effort that
benefits students
and others who live in a town
that calls itself
too tough to die.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Mike
Tobias in
Cody, Nebraska.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will be
back with an
addition to our "NewsHour"
Bookshelf: the
story of the Romeo and Juliet of
Afghanistan.
But, first, take this moment to
hear from
your local PBS station. It's a
chance to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
Finally tonight, love and
tragedy in Afghanistan.
Jeffrey Brown has the latest
edition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: Zakia and Ali
first came to
the world's attention in the
pages of The
New York Times in 2014. Later,
the paper would
capture their story on video.
They had grown up on adjacent
potato farms
in Afghanistan's remote mountain
province
of Bamiyan, playing together as
children,
and, as teenagers, falling in
love.
ZAKIA, Afghanistan (through
translator): At
first, I wasn't aware of my
feelings, because
I didn't know him. I was very
young and didn't
understand these things. When I
was out in
the farm fields, he wrote his
cell phone number
and gave it to me. Then we
talked on the phone
and he said, "I love you," and
we got to know
each other and started to love
each other.
ALI, Afghanistan (through
translator): It
looked to me that it wasn't
possible for us
to get together.
JEFFREY BROWN: Indeed, it was
prohibited because
of the Afghan custom of arranged
marriages
and by Islamic law. The two were
separated
by religion and ethnicity, she a
Sunni and
Tajik, he a Shiite and Hazara.
When their love became known,
the couple,
especially Zakia, faced
condemnation, beatings
and later the threat of death
from her family.
ROD NORDLAND, Author, "The
Lovers: Afghanistan's
Romeo and Juliet": Her family
were not wealthy,
but they were big and they were
numerous.
And they -- on their side, in
their quest
to kill her, they had a very
powerful weapon,
and that was the knowledge that
nobody has
ever been successfully
prosecuted for an honor
killing in Afghanistan.
JEFFREY BROWN: A new book tells
the story.
It's called "The Lovers:
Afghanistan's Romeo
and Juliet," by New York Times
Kabul bureau
chief Rod Nordland. Nordland
wrote the original
article and a number of
follow-ups.
We met recently at the Sackler
Gallery in
Washington, D.C., as a new
exhibition on Afghanistan
art, Turquoise Mountain, was
being installed.
Nordland told me he'd been
looking for a way
to report on so-called honor
killings, the
murder of young women by their
own families
for causing them shame.
ROD NORDLAND: We would hear
about honor killings
from time to time, but there'd
be a real paucity
of information about them,
because nobody
would talk about them. And we
knew probably
there were many more honor
killings than anybody
ever hears of.
JEFFREY BROWN: In Zakia and Ali,
you found
two young people who in some
ways seem very
normal to their time and place,
but clearly
in other ways were not, right?
They were willing
to do something that went well
beyond the
bounds of their culture. Did you
ever figure
out what it was in them that
made them that
way?
ROD NORDLAND: It's hard to say,
but I think,
if I had to identify one thing,
it would be
that Zakia has a real spark of
independence
and a real strength of
character. And she
decided that she wanted to do
this and she
was going to do it.
Falling in love is not an
unusual thing in
Afghanistan, like it isn't in
any country,
any place. It's just forbidden,
and it's frowned
upon by mullahs. It's actually
preached against.
JEFFREY BROWN: Zakia first went
to a women's
shelter. Then, upping the stakes
dramatically,
the two eloped. Sought by police
and her family,
they went into hiding in rural
caves and in
Kabul.
ROD NORDLAND: It didn't occur to
me even that
she would have the courage to
run on her own,
18-year-old girl, never been
outside her own
village. I was the first man she
had ever
sat in the same room with that
wasn't a brother
or father or Ali.
And many times, even the first
interview I
had with them, they said that
they would -- they
would be happy if they were just
together
for a day. And if the other
person were killed,
they would gladly kill
themselves.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nordland, working
with a video
crew, was able to follow Zakia
and Ali periodically
over the next year, as they had
a daughter
named Ruqia.
But his stories, picked up by
Afghan media,
also made it harder for them to
hide. And
Nordland himself became part of
the story,
at one point providing the
couple a getaway
car and some money.
ROD NORDLAND: I stepped over the
line between
being a journalist and being a
participant.
And I admit I did that, and
probably by the
precepts of my profession, that
was the wrong
thing to do. But rules sometimes
need to be
broken in the interest of doing
what's right.
There are times, as a
journalist, I mean,
you know, if you come across a
car crash,
do you take the picture first or
help the
victim inside the car?
And you obviously help the
victim inside the
car. I mean, most of us would.
And it was
a little bit like that in a way.
JEFFREY BROWN: The largest
context here, of
course, is the status of women
in Afghanistan.
And after 2001 -- you write
about this -- so
much hope there was. But,
according to this
story, the story you tell, not
much has changed.
ROD NORDLAND: Yes. When it comes
to a lot
of these abusive customary
practices, that's
right. They're still as
prevalent as they
once were.
Honor killing, child brides, the
practice
of baad, when a little girl is
sold to pay
Honor killing, child brides, the
practice
of baad, when a little girl is
sold to pay
a family debt, often a debt for
some moral
crime that a male relative has
carried out.
It would be unfair to say there
hasn't been
improvement, because there are
millions of
girls in schools that didn't
exist during
the Taliban time.
Still, when you look at the
metrics, Afghanistan
still remains the worst place in
the world
to be born a woman, in life
expectancy, maternal
mortality, anything. And you
look at it, and
that's pretty shocking,
considering the investment
that we have tried to make in
bettering women's
that's pretty shocking,
considering the investment
that we have tried to make in
bettering women's
lives.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nordland remains
in touch with
Zakia and Ali, who are still in
hiding. In
a video he and his team made of
the couple's
life today with their daughter,
they said
this:
ZAKIA (through translator): If I
were killed
and not here with her, I hope
that our daughter
ZAKIA (through translator): If I
were killed
and not here with her, I hope
that our daughter
will grow up to learn where to
go and where
not to go, and will be educated.
ALI (through translator): My
advice to someone
who falls in love is that he
should do something
ALI (through translator): My
advice to someone
who falls in love is that he
should do something
to win her heart and have
a
happy life.
to win her heart and have
a
happy life.
JEFFREY BROWN: The couple
decided against
fleeing for Europe, at least for
now, but
JEFFREY BROWN: The couple
decided against
fleeing for Europe, at least for
now, but
hope to find asylum somewhere.
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online:
Long before they made luxury
cars and SUVs,
BMW made airplane engines that
helped power
Germany's fleet of fighter
planes during World
War I. The automaker celebrates
its centennial
today. You can read more about
its beginnings
on our home page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.